GWEN IFILL: Good
evening. I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: a buffer zone planned,
a cease-fire broken. Kurdish
rebels fighting against ISIS in
Syria and Iraq come under fire
-- the delicate balance
of alliances in a
war-torn region.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In a historic
trip to Africa, President Obama
promotes peace, democracy
and human rights.
GWEN IFILL: Plus: a journey into
the history of World War II,
honoring the silent heroes
who fought and died
in Normandy on D-Day.
CATHY GORN, Executive Director,
National History Day: We know
about the generals. We know
about
the really famous heroes, but
the average guy that went out
there and did what he had
to do, they -- they are just
numbers. So these kids are
getting to know them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: The death toll from
Sunday's Al-Shabaab suicide
bombing in Somalia's capital
rose
today to 15. The facade of the
five-story hotel in Mogadishu
was sheared off when a
car packed with explosives
rammed into its front gate.
In neighboring Ethiopia today,
President Obama said the Islamic
militant's attack underscored
the need to push back
against violent extremism.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: Yesterday's
bombing in Mogadishu reminds us
that terrorist groups like
Al-Shabaab offer nothing but
death and destruction and have
to be stopped. We have
got more work to do.
GWEN IFILL: The blast killed a
Kenyan diplomat, a Chinese
embassy guard and two
journalists,
among others.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Airstrikes
resumed in Yemen today, shortly
after a midnight humanitarian
cease-fire went into effect. The
Saudi-led coalition pounded
Houthi targets near the
rebel-held military base of
al-Anad and north of the port
city of Aden. Fifteen coalition
troops were also accidentally
killed in two strikes in the
province of Lahj. The five-day
truce was designed to get
much-needed humanitarian aid to
civilians in the hardest-hit
areas.
GWEN IFILL: With no way to make
a looming loan repayment, Puerto
Rico has come up with
a plan to raise up to $500
million through oil revenue.
That's only a fraction of the
$3 billion it had hoped to raise
to refinance its debt. The
governor's chief of staff told
reporters today the commonwealth
can't raise enough from its
public finance corporation
bonds before an
August 1 deadline.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S. Olympic
Committee killed Boston's bid to
host the Summer Games
in 2024 after the city raised
financial questions. Earlier
today, Boston's mayor express
worry
the multibillion-dollar event
would put taxpayers at risk.
Marty Walsh said he didn't want
the
city's residents to have to foot
the bill if local Olympic
organizers ran out of money.
MARTY WALSH (D), Mayor of
Boston, Massachusetts: I refuse
to mortgage the future of the
city
away. I refuse to put Boston on
the hook for overruns. And I
refuse to commit to signing
a guarantee that uses taxpayers'
dollars to pay for the Olympics.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There are only
seven weeks left to officially
nominate another city.
The U.S. hasn't hosted a Summer
Olympics since the 1996 games in
Atlanta.
In economic news, China's
Shanghai stock index plummeted
8.5 percent today. Most of that
sharp decline was in the last
hour of trading. It was its
largest one-day loss since 2007,
in spite of the Chinese
government's recent efforts to
stabilize the market. Analysts
attributed the sell-off to
weaker-than-expected economic
data, including a drop in
Chinese
factory activity and
industrial profits.
GWEN IFILL: Fears of a slowdown
in China's economy pushed stocks
lower on Wall Street.
The Dow Jones industrial average
slid 128 points to close at
17440. The Nasdaq fell
more than 48 points, and the
S&P 500 lost 12 points.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Bobbi Kristina
Brown, the daughter of R&B
singers Bobbi Brown and the late
Whitney
Houston, has died. She passed
away Sunday at a hospice in
Duluth, Georgia, six months
after she was found unresponsive
in a bathtub. She was 22 years
old.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a delicate balance of alliances
under threat after airstrikes
hit ISIS and Kurdish targets;
President Obama promotes his
economic and human rights agenda
for Africa, and much more.
GWEN IFILL: Turkey and the U.S.
are working on plans to sweep
Islamic State fighters from
a strip of land across the
Turkish border with Syria. This
comes as Istanbul steps up
its air campaign against the
extremist group and its
crackdown on Kurdish insurgents.
Special correspondent Jane
Ferguson reports from Southern
Turkey, where many are holding
their breaths.
JANE FERGUSON: American fighter
jets will soon be launched
closer to the Islamic State
group than ever before. From
this Turkish base at Incirlik,
they will pound the extremist
group just across the
border in Syria.
A new deal between the U.S. and
Turkey will allow Americans to
launch airstrikes from
Turkish soil and increase
Turkey's role in the fight. This
is a major turnaround for
Turkey, which has been
criticized for not doing enough
to tackle ISIS. Now deadly
attacks
by the group along the border
have pushed the Turkish
government to act.
At this outpost, 100 yards from
ISIS, a Turkish soldier was shot
dead by the group last week.
Elbeyli village is the nearest
Turkish village. People here are
terrified that ISIS is simply
too close. Some told us they
want more soldiers to keep them
safe.
"We are so nervous," local
resident Mehmet Orman (ph) says.
"We want to see a normal
life again here.
We cannot sleep."
An hour down the road, the
group's power is alarmingly
apparent. In areas like this
along
the Turkish border, ISIS are so
close to Turkey that you can see
their flags flying. Just
behind me on that wall, there is
an ISIS flag, just feet away.
Now, what the Turkish government
want to do is to push ISIS back
from these areas to create some
sort of safe zone or
buffer.
STEVEN COOK, Douglas Dillon
Fellow, Council on Foreign
Relations: It's clear that
Turkey
believes that, once you
establish a safe zone, people
will go back to it.
JANE FERGUSON: Steven Cook is a
Middle East scholar at the
Council on Foreign Relations.
STEVEN COOK: It will become a
place from which moderate Syrian
forces will then expand in
its march against the Islamic
State, as well as the Assad
regime. But, of course, one can
imagine a whole host of
scenarios that pull Turkish
forces, as well as potentially
American
forces further into
the Syria fight.
JANE FERGUSON: The Islamic State
has also hit the Kurdish people
in Eastern Turkey.
Ethnic Kurdish communities
straddle the border between
Turkey and Syria. Kurdish rebel
fighters
inside Syria have been
battling ISIS for months.
Last week, a suicide bomber
killed 32 young activists in the
Kurdish town of Suruc near
the border inside Turkey. The
attack shocked the nation and
increased calls for action
against ISIS. The young people
killed here were planning to
bring toys for children across
the border a few miles to
Kobani, where Kurdish forces had
routed ISIS earlier this year.
The five-month-long battle for
Kobani was a significant victory
for the Kurdish forces.
It showed their growing strength
inside Syria. The Turkish
government watched with concern
those gains in Kurdish
territory, fearful their own
Kurdish population may push
harder
for independence. Now this new
deal with the American military
opens the door for Turkey
to fight not only
ISIS, but the Kurds.
And it's already happening.
Turkish jets bombed both ISIS in
Syria and Kurdish forces of the
Turkish insurgent force called
the PKK, based in Iraq, as soon
as the deal was announced.
A two-year-old cease-fire with
those Kurdish rebels in Turkey
is now believed to be over.
People back in Suruc say Turkey
is only starting another war
inside its own territory.
In the name of operations
against ISIS, they're attacking
Kurds," this man tells me. "We
don't
accept this. I'm sure we don't
want war. Why don't we want war?
Look at Egypt, Kobani,
Lebanon, Iraq. You can see
what happened there."
Although American jets have been
helping the Kurds win territory
from ISIS in Syria, U.S.
officials now say they support
Turkey's strikes against Kurdish
targets.
Turkey's involvement in the war
against ISIS could prove a
crucial turning point in
U.S.-led
coalition efforts to destroy the
group. Opening a new fighting
front against Kurds in the
region simultaneously will
change the delicate balance of
alliances in an already complex
war.
GWEN IFILL: I spoke to Jane
Ferguson a short time ago.
Jane, we're talking now about an
ISIL/ISIS-free zone right along
the border now. Why is it
that Turkey is
interested in this now?
JANE FERGUSON: Well, Turkey is
under increasing pressure. The
Turkish president is under
pressure
from his own population to do
something about ISIS and not to
be seen as being soft on terror.
Violence in the past week has
shocked Turkey. But what's
complicated issues for the
Turkish
government is the fact that
there are so many Kurdish rebels
on their border with Syria,
on the Syrian side of the
border. Those rebels have been
making massive gains against
ISIS
and taking territory away from
ISIS whenever they have
victories, which they have had
in
the recent months.
That complicates things for
Turkey because the Turkish
government are dealing with a
large Kurdish minority in their
country who, for decades, have
been pushing for independence.
And they, of course, don't want
to see any bolstering of Kurdish
calls for independence
right on their border
and in their territory.
GWEN IFILL: Is there also -- you
mentioned the word complication
more than once. There
are a lot of complications here.
And another of them is Syria
itself, the degree to which
anything involved in this
collaboration could help the
pro-Assad forces in Syria.
JANE FERGUSON: This, of course,
does complicate things, because
it will of course be fighting
ISIS and not necessarily
fighting Assad, and that is
something that the Turkish
government
have been criticizing
the coalition for.
They really wanted airstrikes
against Assad. They wanted a
no-fly zone imposed. So for
them, they had been holding out
for that. But at the minute,
it's likely that this is
really just going -- the details
of this deal will be revealed
tomorrow, probably most likely
at that NATO meeting.
So we won't know the details
just yet. But the plan, as far
as officials are telling
journalists, would be to create
this buffer zone to allow
certain rebel groups, not
Kurdish
rebel groups, and certain rebel
groups that are being described
as moderate, to take over
that specific area. That would
give them room to resupply. It
would give them room to
maneuver,
room to basically operate in the
area around Aleppo, not in
Aleppo city.
GWEN IFILL: But we don't know
how far this buffer zone you're
talking about would actually
extend.
JANE FERGUSON: That's not clear
yet how far in it would go. It's
unlikely that it would
go of course all the way to
Aleppo city. That would be an
enormous military target.
But if it could just move in far
enough to be able to push ISIS
away from the border,
so that they no longer can touch
the Turkish border, that would
be significant in itself
militarily because that would
affect their link to the outside
world, essentially.
GWEN IFILL: Jane Ferguson
reporting for us tonight in
Turkey, thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Obama
continued his visit to Africa
today, making a personal push
for peace and calls
for democracy.
"The Star-Spangled Banner"
greeted the first American
president to visit Africa's
second
most-populous country. But after
the pomp, the president spoke of
urgent business, not
in Ethiopia, but in its neighbor
to the West, South Sudan. Since
the U.S. helped midwife
the founding of the world's
newest nation in 2011, civil war
has left tens of thousands
dead and displaced
two million more.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: Our hope is that
we can actually bring about
the kind of peace that the
people of South Sudan so
desperately need.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The president and
African leaders discussed
options, including sanctions, if
a peace deal is not reached by
August 17. Mr. Obama urged
inclusion, and respect for
human rights, in a news
conference with Ethiopia's prime
minister.
BARACK OBAMA: I believe that,
when all voices are being heard,
when people know that they
are included in the political
process, that makes a country
stronger and more successful
and more innovative.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That message was
also central to the president's
visit to Kenya over the
weekend.
It was a highly anticipated
visit to his father's homeland
and Mr. Obama's first in nearly
three
decades. Kenyans lined the
streets to welcome the
president, whom they see as one
of their
own. But security precautions
prevented him from greeting many
of the residents, so thrilled
to see the Kenyan-American
president, as he referred to
himself, or visit his father's
village.
He did, however, attend a
private dinner with members of
his family, including his
grandmother
and half-sister. And he cut a
rug at a state dinner held in
his honor, joining in on a
traditional dance.
Aside from the celebrations, the
president also pushed his human
rights message. Kenya's
president, Uhuru Kenyatta,
emphasized the threats of
terrorism facing his country,
and
promised to work toward
equal rights for all.
UHURU KENYATTA, Kenyan
President: We agreed together
that we can build a future in
which
our people of all faiths,
cultures live peacefully
together.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But the country
has a checkered record when it
comes to human rights. In 2010,
Kenyatta himself was named a
suspect in crimes against
humanity by the International
Criminal
Court.
President Obama spoke about
corruption, ethnic divisions,
and human rights, urging Kenyans
to -- quote -- "choose the path
to progress." And he had stern
words for the treatment of
people based on sexual
orientation, even as Kenyatta
dismissed gay rights as a
nonissue
for Kenyans.
BARACK OBAMA: So, I'm
unequivocal on this. The idea
that they are going to be
treated
differently or abused because of
who they love is wrong, full
stop.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tomorrow, in
Addis Ababa, Mr. Obama will be
the first American president
to address the African Union.
Joining me now to discuss the
visit and President Obama's
record on Africa is career
diplomat
and former Assistant Secretary
of State for the Bureau of
African Affairs under President
Obama Johnnie Carson. He's now a
senior adviser at the U.S.
Institute of Peace. And William
Gumede, he's an author and
professor at the University of
the Witwatersrand in South
Africa.
And we welcome you both.
WILLIAM GUMEDE, Professor,
University of the Witwatersrand:
Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF:
Professor -- welcome.
Professor Gumede, let me begin
with you. How do you think this
trip has gone, and how much
difference do you think
it's going to make?
WILLIAM GUMEDE: Unfortunately,
almost -- this trip is almost
coming too late, at the tail
end of the Obama presidency.
And you must understand what has
been happening the last couple
of years in Africa. We had
-- China has become a really big
factor in Africa's growth and
influence in Africa. So,
Obama coming to Africa, he has
made the right democratic
noises, but he's almost a little
bit too late.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ambassador
Carson, what about that? Is the
president coming too late?
JOHNNIE CARSON, Former U.S.
Assistant Secretary of State:
Absolutely not.
I think that, in fact, is
turning out to be a very
substantive and positive trip,
with
President Obama focusing on
expanding trade and commercial
opportunities with Africa,
with these two countries and the
United States, and strengthening
the security partnership
that the United States has had
with both Kenya and Ethiopia.
The president is also getting a
chance to talk about some of the
new initiatives that
he has been responsible for,
Power Africa, to substantially
increase the amount of
electrical
power reaching African cities
and communities, Feed the
Future, which is designed to
promote
a green revolution across
Africa, to help end to
starvation and famine at the
village
level and to expand
agro-industries at the upper
level, and particularly a focus
on youth,
the next generation.
So this is an important trip,
and it's his fourth trip to the
continent and may not in
fact be his last.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Professor
Gumede, these are some specifics
you heard Ambassador Carson
listing here that have to do
with the economy, that have to
do with working with young
people.
WILLIAM GUMEDE: Just to repeat
what has been happening over the
last couple of years, we
have seen the longest growth
spurt in Africa, you know, I
mean, since independence and
since
the Second World War.
And if you look at how the
dynamics of this growth, the
dynamics of this growth has been
driven really, you know, by
newly emerging markets buying
Africa's products, getting
engaged in Africa, whether it's
China, Brazil, or India. That is
the nature of -- there's
been a big game-changing couple
of moments the last couple of
years in Africa.
And the U.S., you know, has
almost lagged behind and really
going to have to work much
harder, you know, to catch up
with what has happened on the
continent. If you just think
about it, at the moment, civil
society on the continent, where
the new African leadership
should be coming from, you know,
have struggled the last couple
of years, because, you know,
the foreign funding that they
used to get in the past has
declined after the global
financial crisis.
And many of the civil societies,
the democrats in Africa have
struggled and had hoped that
the U.S. would have played a
much bigger, much stronger role
in providing them with
capacity, yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me ask
-- put that question to
Ambassador Carson.
Why -- to listen with to what
the professor is saying, it
sounds as if the U.S. has
dropped
the ball, China has been active
there, other countries, that
there has been an opportunity
to engage, and the U.S.
hasn't taken advantage of it.
JOHNNIE CARSON: The United
States has been deeply engaged
in Africa, not only as a
development
assistance partner, but
increasingly as a trading
partner as well.
The United States remains one of
the largest single bilateral
contributors to development
assistance in Africa. And the
United States remains one of
Africa's largest trading
partners.
I think that President Obama,
over the last several years, has
gone out of his way to
encourage American businessmen
and investors to increasingly
look at Africa as the last
global economic frontier.
You may recall, Judy, that, in
2014, President Obama held the
first U.S.-Africa Summit.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
JOHNNIE CARSON: And the first
day of that summit was devoted
all to economic, commercial
and investment interests.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Professor Gumede,
it almost sounds like you're
talking about two different
situations, with your
description that the U.S. has
been absent, and Ambassador
Carson
saying the U.S. has been very
engaged. How do you account for
that?
WILLIAM GUMEDE: Well, the U.S.
has been engaged with Africa,
but, you know, it's been engaged
almost in the wrong way. It's
been engaged sort of in the old
way -- let's call it your
old pre-financial crisis ways,
whereas Africa has moved and,
you know, and the world,
unfortunately,
has moved, and for developing
countries have moved, and Africa
has also moved.
So, for me, the U.S. is really
catching up and needs to do
quite a lot to catch up. But
just in terms of looking into
the future, I think, you know,
if Obama, if this trip,
if out of this trip could be a
focus on African civil society,
because that's where the future
leadership are coming -- will be
coming from. That's where the
future democrats are going
to come from, if they can be
supported and given the
capacity, which has not happened
the last couple of years.
JUDY WOODRUFF:
Well, we hear you.
And, Ambassador Carson, I do
want to give you a chance just
quickly to comment on the
president's remarks in his
public speeches in Africa about
human rights, about sexual
orientation, the lack of respect
for that. Are these the kinds of
statements that are
going to have resonance
on the continent?
JOHNNIE CARSON: Absolutely,
because I think that democracy,
strengthening democratic
institutions
and promoting good governance
are at the basis of having a
well -- good, well-organized
society.
I think that a society that
protects the rights of
individuals also protects the
intellectual
property of those individuals. A
society that protects civil
liberties also protects
corporate
liberties. And I think a society
that is open and inclusive is a
society that generates
both good idea and greater
productivity from both men and
women.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ambassador
Johnnie Carson, Professor
William Gumede, we thank you
both.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
student historians document the
stories of silent heroes at
Normandy;
record fines for Fiat Chrysler
after failing to recall millions
of unsafe cars; and breaking
silence, the personal accounts
of 35 women who accuse Bill
Cosby of assault.
But, first, the 2016
presidential contenders are on
the attack, each jockeying to
get the
chance to secure a place on the
stage for the first Republican
debate in Cleveland in
10 days. The polls are getting
tighter and their rhetoric is
getting hotter, just in
time for Politics Monday.
That's with Amy Walter of The
Cook Political Report and Tamara
Keith of NPR.
Let's start with Mike Huckabee,
shall we? Mike Huckabee said --
and we can take a look
at what he had to say -- that
"The president's foreign policy
is the most feckless in American
history. It is so naive that he
would trust the Iranians. By
doing so, he will take the
Israelis and march them
to the door of the oven."
Obviously, that was a Holocaust
reference. And before I ask you
to weigh in on that,
let's hear what the president
had to say in response when he
was asked about it while
traveling in Africa.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: When you get
rhetoric like this, mash it gets
attention, and maybe this is
just an effort to push Mr. Trump
out of the headlines. But
it's not the kind of leadership
that's needed for America right
now.
And I don't think that's what
anybody, Democratic, Republican
or independent, is looking for
out of their political leaders.
GWEN IFILL: It should be said,
Amy, that no one asked the
president about Donald Trump,
but he managed to bring it up.
Democrats are kind of happy
about that.
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: What a surprise.
GWEN IFILL: What is this
politics of provocation we're
talking about now that we're
seeing?
AMY WALTER: I think the
president is correct that it
does have a lot to do with the
fact
that Donald Trump is now
sucking up all the oxygen.
And, in fact, he is sucking up
that place that so many of these
other candidates thought
they would be sitting in right
now, which is the
anti-establishment,
angry-at-the-system
candidate. There are plenty of
people in that position or vying
for that position, Ben Carson,
Ted Cruz, Rand Paul, Mike
Huckabee. They're not getting
the attention. Donald Trump is,
and they are, as such,
increasingly putting their
rhetoric up and putting their
antics
up in order to try
to dethrone him.
GWEN IFILL: So, there's Donald
Trump. There's Lindsey Graham
responding by beating up his
cell phone or doing something.
And there's Governor Perry who
said that maybe after -- in
the wake of a shooting in
Lafayette, Louisiana, that maybe
moviegoers should bring guns.
Everybody
seems to be trying
to top each other.
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: It's all about the
debate.
There's a debate coming up. They
all want a place on that debate
stage. Only the top
10 in national polls earn a
place on that first debate
stage. And how do you raise your
profile? How do you get in the
top 10? Well, some of them are
running ads. Some of them
are taking chain saws to the tax
code or golf clubs to their cell
phones.
They're trying to get attention.
They're jumping up and down and
saying, hi. Perhaps if you
get a call from a pollster, you
will support me, so that I can
get on that debate stage,
and it's national polls, not the
state polls in Iowa and New
Hampshire, where more maybe
people are paying attention.
GWEN IFILL: Well, we're going to
talk about those polls in a
minute, but first I want
to talk a little bit about
what's getting lost in some of
this attack and counterattack,
which is policy.
AMY WALTER: Hmm.
GWEN IFILL: What do we know --
hmm. What do we know about
Donald Trump and what he
actually
believes, Amy?
AMY WALTER: I don't know what he
actually believes in. I don't
know if he actually believes
in anything.
And, honestly, he's been all
over the map, if you look at
statements that he's made in
his political career, I guess,
if we could call it that, where
he has flirted with running
for president before. Remember,
he flirted with running as an
independent. He's talked
about being a Democrat.
He's been a Republican.
GWEN IFILL: He's been
pro-life, pro-choice,
AMY WALTER: He's been pro-life,
pro-choice. He's said Hillary
Clinton is a very good person,
he likes her very much. Now he's
saying she's terrible, she would
be a terrible president.
He's talked about a surtax on
very, very wealthy people. Now
he's talking about how terrible
the tax code is.
He has really been all over the
map. Look, the reality is, there
is no there there when
it comes to Donald Trump. What
he's been brilliant at is
exploiting the anger that's been
there
and the frustration that's been
there on Republican voters. The
Tea Party tapped into it. Tea
Party candidates tapped into it.
But, as I said, there's only
this much vote there. Donald
Trump is getting all of it.
Nobody else is able to
peel some of it away.
GWEN IFILL: Including Hillary
Clinton, who in the last week
has given major speeches
on the economy and on climate
change. Is it breaking through?
TAMARA KEITH: Not really. I
think that Donald Trump is
monopolizing the headlines. And
I
think, also, it's summer and
people aren't necessarily ready
for a lot of policy.
But what I think the Clinton
campaign is doing here is, the
way you get coverage,
traditionally,
is you have a horse race, and
then people cover the horse
race. Well, she doesn't truly
have a horse race right now. And
so she is filling the horse race
void by doing these
policy rollouts.
But there hasn't been a ton of
detail in any of them and there
hasn't been a lot of meat
yet. She keeps saying, well,
that will come later in the
summer.
GWEN IFILL: But there has been
more of a horse race lately, at
least the horse race to the
debate stage, than
we have seen before.
So, let's look at the latest NBC
News/Marist poll in New
Hampshire and in Iowa. In New
Hampshire, Donald Trump, for
everything you say, is leading.
He's at 21 percent, followed
by George W. -- I'm sorry -- Jeb
Bush at 14 percent, Scott
Walker, the governor of
Wisconsin,
at 12, and John Kasich at 7
percent, rounding out the top
four.
That's kind of a big turnaround.
AMY WALTER: Yes, absolutely.
Nobody would have said three
months ago that Donald Trump
would be topping the polls.
But if you said to me, will
there be an anti-establishment
Tea Party candidate up in the
top three in
New Hampshire? Of course. Right
now, that happens to be Donald
Trump. The person I think
who is benefiting the most, by
the way, is Jeb Bush, because if
you notice in this poll
and if we see the Iowa poll,
he's in the top three in all of
these. Again, it's consolidating
an anti-Bush vote,
anti-establishment vote to one
person.
It's everybody else that is
desperate now for attention,
including the one person who
doesn't show up in there very
much, and that's Marco Rubio.
GWEN IFILL: Let's talk about the
Democrats, because even though
Hillary Clinton is still
well ahead in these polls,
Bernie Sanders is kind of
creeping up. She is at 47
percent
in New Hampshire. Bernie Sanders
is following at 34 percent. But
that's up 13 points since
February.
TAMARA KEITH: I think what has
happened is that Bernie Sanders
has truly consolidated
the anti-Hillary vote.
Martin O'Malley is scrapping,
scraping and trying to get a
little bit of it. Lincoln
Chafee would love a little bit
of it. Jim Webb would love a
little bit of it. But really
Bernie Sanders came in and he
just -- he became the
alternative to Hillary. He's the
thing
that's there for all of those
people who just -- who say
things like, I don't want
another
Clinton or another Bush.
GWEN IFILL: Let's go to Iowa
briefly, where the numbers are
actually not so different,
except, in this case, in Iowa,
Donald Trump is coming in
second. We have Scott Walker,
the Midwestern governor, up
top. Why is that different?
AMY WALTER: Again, I think
you're still seeing the same
three things here, where you
have
Bush somewhere here as the
establishment candidate.
You have Donald Trump, who, by
the way, if you look at his
overall approval ratings in
that poll, I think he has
actually peaked. His approval --
disapproval ratings among
Republicans are in the high 40s,
and in New Hampshire in the mid
to high 50s.
So I don't know if he can get
much higher than where he is.
The question is, if there
are still 15 people, serious
candidates in the race as we go
into those primaries, will
21 percent be enough to
actually win one of these?
GWEN IFILL: And Hillary Clinton
and Bernie Sanders are one and
two in Iowa as well.
But I want to talk about the
favorable/unfavorables, because
when you talk about Donald Trump
leading,
he's still incredibly unpopular
as well in the public at large.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes, that is a
problem that he has. He has huge
name I.D. and people have
strong opinions about them and
many of them are not big fans.
Or many of the people say that
they don't expect that he would
ultimately go on to be
the Republican nominee, which is
not a great sign for the staying
power of his candidacy.
Now, I will also just say, this
time in 2011, Michele Bachmann
was riding high.
GWEN IFILL: President
Bachmann, yes.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes. And Herman
Cain was then riding high. There
was like an escalator to
a cliff. And that could well be
happening this time, sort of the
alternative to the
establishment candidate.
GWEN IFILL: I will remind you of
that after we get to the debates
and Donald Trump is
still there.
(LAUGHTER)
AMY WALTER: That's right.
GWEN IFILL: Tamara Keith, Amy
Walter, thank you both very
much.
TAMARA KEITH: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: an effort to
make history more meaningful by
bring the classroom to
where it happened.
The "NewsHour"'s April Brown
traveled to Normandy, France, to
see a program that uses a
personal
approach to highlight the
sacrifices made during World War
II. The report is part of
our American Graduate series, a
public media initiative funded
by the Corporation for Public
Broadcasting.
APRIL BROWN: It has been more
than 70-years since Broadway
Valentine Sims, Eugene Mlot
(ph), and Francisco Blas (ph)
died during the invasion of
Normandy, the turning point
in the allied campaign to
liberate Europe from Nazi
Germany in World War II.
But their sacrifice and that of
13 other servicemen is being
remembered and honored in
graveside
eulogies at the American
cemetery perched above Omaha
Beach in Northern France.
STUDENT: Technician 5th Class
Broadway Valentine Sims was born
in 1916 in the remote town of
Elizabethton, Tennessee.
STUDENT: Eugene G. Mlot (ph) was
an orderly worker, shipping
clerk and electrician with
four years of high school under
his belt when he joined the Army
Air Force in 1942.
STUDENT: Francisco Blas embodied
the characteristics of bravery,
courage and unwavering loyalty
as he faced segregation,
uncertainty and even death
itself.
APRIL BROWN: This is an
important part of National
History Day's Normandy
Institute.
VANESSA TAYLOR, Student: I will
never sacrifice of Henry and
Louie made for their country
and the sacrifice
they made for me.
CATHY GORN, Executive Director,
National History Day: The
program started because of a
concern
that today's young people don't
really understand what sacrifice
is all about, sacrifice and
freedom and how those
two fit together.
APRIL BROWN: As executive
director of National History
Day, Cathy Gorn has led 15
student-teacher
teams on a journey through
history each summer over the
past five years. By following in
the footsteps of those who
served and died during the
Normandy campaign, they learn
about
D-Day and World War II.
CATHY GORN: We have asked them
to look at someone from their
own backyards, their own
community, or at least their own
state, and find out all they
could about this individual
who gave that ultimate sacrifice
-- many of these people were not
too much older than
the kids that we bring here --
and to honor them in way that
gives them their history
back.
APRIL BROWN: Before they even go
to France, teachers and students
selected for the institute
spend months becoming
historians. They contact living
family members, collect
pictures, love
letters and official military
documents, hoping to unlock any
clues about their silent hero.
CATHY GORN: We know about the
generals. We know about the
really famous heroes, but the
average guy that went out there
and did what he had to do, they
are just numbers. So these
kids are getting to know them.
APRIL BROWN: There is a stop in
Washington, D.C., to learn more
about the war beyond what
can be taken from a textbook. At
the National Archives in College
Park, Maryland, the teams
work with some of the nation's
leading caretakers of World War
II artifacts, hoping to uncover
further details amid the
Archives' four billion
documents.
NORWOOD THOMAS JR., World War II
Veteran: We had several planes
that crashed with all
men on board.
APRIL BROWN: But the human costs
of war can perhaps best be told
by those who were there;
92-year-old Norwood Thomas Jr.
fought as part of famed 101st
Airborne Division. He was among
the first Allied troops to land
in Normandy, parachuting into a
field under cover of darkness.
NORWOOD THOMAS JR.: On the drop
zone that I landed on, we were
supposed to have three
battalions of infantry. This
would be approximately 2,000
men. I landed at 1:21 in the
morning.
Daybreak, we moved off that drop
zone, we were able to garner 95
men.
APRIL BROWN: When they get to
France, it's time to tell the
stories of their servicemen,
among them a pilot, a technician
and two radiomen, twin brothers
from Nebraska.
Vanessa Taylor from Ainsworth,
Nebraska, learned Henry and
Louie Pieper died together when
their ship struck a mine
in the English Channel.
VANESSA TAYLOR: Their parents
had received a letter from the
twins only two days before
their death, stating: "Do not
worry about us. We are
together."
SPENCER VALENTI, Student: So he
probably landed like right
there.
APRIL BROWN: Spencer Valenti and
his teacher, Thomas Leighty (ph)
of Wilmington, Delaware,
studied the life of medic
William Verderamo (ph), who saw
action in North Africa and
Sicily
before the Battle of Normandy.
SPENCER VALENTI: A lot of his
family members say that he was a
really outgoing sort of
person, that he'd always say --
when he registered for the Army,
that he would always say that
he's going out to
save the world.
APRIL BROWN: Private Verderamo
was killed on June 6, 1944
D-Day. Spencer uncovered a
letter that was later sent by
the Army Effects Bureau to
soldier's wife of six months,
Mary.
It reads:
MAN: "I regret to advise that
included among your husband's
effects are some photos which
are damaged, apparently by
bloodstains. I shall appreciate
it if you will indicate whether
you desire these articles
forwarded with his property."
AUDREY CALOVICH, Student: It
makes it very real and vivid.
And I do have a very vivid
imagination. So, I'm able to put
myself in stories. I'm able to
imagine if this is where
they ran up the
beach, got show down.
APRIL BROWN: At first, Audrey
Calovich of Kansas City,
Missouri, only knew Flight
Officer
Edmund Decker as a decorated
pilot killed by German fire on
June 8, 1944. She'd eventually
find out much more.
AUDREY CALOVICH: Ed possessed a
joy of mischief and adventure,
an eye for trouble, and a lover
of life. He was dashing and
handsome. Flight Officer Decker
was idealistic, cocky and brave.
He was a fighter
pilot, a good one.
APRIL BROWN: Many of the details
Audrey discovered came from
Decker's family in Kansas city
and
an alumni group at his old high
school. But she found few
military documents that
mentioned
Decker, and that has given her
a new empathy for historians.
AUDREY CALOVICH: Being on this
trip, you understand how
important it is to preserve
those documents
for future researchers like us.
APRIL BROWN: Audrey's history
teacher, Lisa Lauck, will use
lessons learned on this trip
to change how she teaches.
LISA LAUCK, Teacher: Looking at
it in the past, how I have
taught it, you think about
the troop movements and the
overall big picture. And you
know people died, but you don't
really,
I don't know, connect
to it emotionally.
And that's something I really
want to change for my students.
So, I hope that they can
take away that these are people
like you and I that had
families, had loved one.
APRIL BROWN: While there is much
emphasis on the personal stories
here, historian Antonin
Dehays is conveying another
important goal of the institute,
that the past can be seen
in many ways.
ANTONIN DEHAYS, Historian: Our
job is to mention all the
aspects of an event, the
glorious
ones, but the darkest
ones as well.
APRIL BROWN: Among them, the
horrors of the Holocaust and the
almost six million Jews
who died. But at a visit to a
German cemetery, Nicole Cordes
of Indianapolis became aware
of how families in that country
were affected as well.
NICOLE CORDES, Student: Someone
had come recently and put a
laminated picture of a soldier,
and they put flowers around it.
And they were fresh flowers. So,
I think he was 19 when
he died.
APRIL BROWN: Back at the
American cemetery, the students
say a final goodbye to the men
they have grown to know.
STUDENT: While Mack and I have
never met, I feel that this
experience has given me an
opportunity to get to know a
face beyond the statistics. A
project that began as a way
for me to share and teach
history has now instead been a
teacher to me.
STUDENT: Eventually, time and
the elements will take back this
plot, but it is a beautiful
thought to think that he will
stay here and that the earth
will always remember him and
his sacrifice.
APRIL BROWN: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm April Brown in
Normandy, France.
GWEN IFILL: The students and
teachers are building Web sites
to share what they learned
about their silent heroes. You
can find a link to them on our
home page, PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Fiat Chrysler
must offer to buy back hundreds
of thousands of Ram pickup
trucks and other vehicles as
part of a settlement with the
federal government. The
automaker
will also pay $105 million in
penalties, the highest civil
fine ever for an auto
manufacturer,
as part of the agreement.
The National Highway Safety
Traffic Administration, or NHTSA
for short, found 23 allegations
of
misconduct with Fiat Chrysler,
covering more than 11 million
vehicles. The government said
the company had failed to notify
owners and it had delayed fixing
vehicles, which included
problems with
steering and control.
Now, this comes just days after
a video showed hackers taking
over a Jeep, and Fiat ordered
a voluntary recall of more than
one million cars in order to
prevent hacking.
Anthony Foxx is the secretary of
transportation, and he joins me
now.
Welcome again to the "NewsHour."
ANTHONY FOXX, U.S. Secretary of
Transportation: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, explain more
why this penalty is being
levied. What is it that Fiat
Chrysler
failed to do?
ANTHONY FOXX: Well, in the
course of doing recalls, the
recalls were basically
ineffective.
And so there were failures to
notify dealers and consumers.
There was failure to inform
NHTSA of various aspects of the
recall. And the recall was just
executed poorly. And so
these fines are calibrated not
only to punish Fiat Chrysler,
but also we have remedial steps
in place to help improve their
performance going forward.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's $105 million
in penalties, we mentioned. It
could have been much higher,
though. I was reading today, if
you had levied, what, $35
million on each of the 23
recalls,
it could have been $700
million or $800 million.
ANTHONY FOXX: Look, this is a
significant penalty. It's the
highest penalty NHTSA has
ever put in place
in its history.
And I think it's a penalty that
will be attention-grabbing not
only to Fiat Chrysler, but also
to the
rest of the industry. Our goal
is to see the industry be
proactive with safety and to
ensure
that when consumers get behind
the wheel, they're able to move
where they're going safely.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How significant
is it, Secretary Foxx, that Fiat
Chrysler is being asked -- or
being ordered, in fact, to take
cars and trucks back that they
have sold? Is this designed
to send a message to the
rest of the auto industry?
ANTHONY FOXX: On that aspect of
the recall, we have found that,
in some cases, there is
no effective remedy that
Chrysler has been able to
produce to solve the problem
consumers
have.
And so, in those cases, we're
having them buy those vehicles
back and of course get
the consumer in a better car.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But this is the
first time something like that's
happened?
ANTHONY FOXX: Well, this...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Of
this magnitude.
ANTHONY FOXX: Yes, this
magnitude, perhaps. I haven't
gone back into the history books
to look, but I know that it's a
rarely used authority, but it
does exist within NHTSA.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How much of a
safety risk is there right now
with Fiat Chrysler? I mentioned
the recall on Friday over the
hacking. And then there was
another recall on Saturday.
How many of their
vehicles are at risk?
ANTHONY FOXX: Well, I think
there are sort of two separate
issues.
The 23 recalls that we're making
the fines towards today, those
recalls, we think, are
going to be much more effective,
given the remedial steps that
are being put in place.
As far as cyber-security is
concerned, this is an ongoing
concern that we have. We are
working with industry to produce
a roundtable with industry
stakeholders, all of whom have
skin in the game when it comes
to cyber-security, so that we
can information across private
sector holders, but also the
government is at the table
working with them to ensure that
we're as safe as possible.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, how should
the -- someone who is watching
-- there are so many car owners
in this country, people who
drive cars and trucks. How
concerned should be people be?
ANTHONY FOXX: Well, what you
should know is that we are not
only working with Fiat Chrysler
to address the specific problem
that emerged last week, but
we're also working to ensure
that, across the industry, there
is a much higher level of
vigilance around these
cyber-security
issues. And there will
be more to come on that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But just on the
recalls overall, Secretary Foxx,
the sense is that NHTSA, the
National Highway Safety Traffic
organization, is just taking a
much tougher line against
the auto industry than has been
the case in the past. Is that
what -- how we should interpret
this?
ANTHONY FOXX: We believe very
firmly that, in this age of
rapidly changing technology
and automakers trying to get
more and more products onto the
marketplace, that safety
can't slip.
And so we are being very
muscular, I would say, in terms
of responding to this
environment
and making sure the industry
gets the appropriate signals
that, if they're proactive, it's
going
to be a better business decision
to deal with these issues before
something gets on the
street or to issue recalls, and
to do the right thing in the
first place.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me finally
ask you about something else
that is part of your portfolio,
and that is a bill before
Congress to fund highways. How
worried are you that, now that
we approach a deadline, the fact
is both houses of Congress are
not able to come together
in some sort of an agreement on
this, and the fact that the
gasoline tax in this country
no longer seems to be something
that Congress is willing to use
to fund the highway?
ANTHONY FOXX: We have a
structural problem with how we
pay for our highways.
And, you know, on the good side
of the ledger, it's good to see
both houses working towards
what they believe are solutions
to solve the problem, even over,
you know, a multiyear
period. But we have lots of
innings left in the week. I'm
hoping that they get to some
resolution so that we don't go
over the highway cliff, because
there are projects across
country
that would be potentially
stopped and jobs that would be
affected as well.
Frankly, the country needs a
long-term highway bill. I have
been saying that the entire time
I have been here, and we will
keep pressing, even if we go
into extra innings beyond this
week.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You think it
could go beyond this week?
ANTHONY FOXX: Potentially. I'm
hoping they find a resolution,
but, you know, we have
to see.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Secretary Anthony
Foxx, we thank you for joining
us.
ANTHONY FOXX: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: "New York" magazine
overnight published an arresting
cover image that has
brought renewed attention to the
dozens of sexual allegations
against Bill Cosby.
Of the 46 women who have now
claimed rape or assault at the
comedian's hands, 35 agreed
to be interviewed and
photographed. A 36th chair is
unoccupied, which sparked a
social
media firestorm about the
assault victims who remain
silent. It's tagged
#TheEmptyChair.
Here is one of the women who
did speak to the magazine.
Joyce Emmons is a former comedy
club manager who said she was
assaulted by a friend of
the comedian's one night after
she asked Cosby for headache
medication.
JOYCE EMMONS, Accuser: And I
don't remember anything after
that, except waking up the
next afternoon. I had no clothes
on. And his friend was there
next to me without clothes
on.
And I said, "What's -- what's
happening?" because I was really
out of it. And he said
to me, "Did you enjoy yourself?"
as if I knew what I was doing.
And I said, "You pig." And, of
course, I used some other words.
I said, "Bill, what did
you give me?" I know it was a
little white pill. I remember
that much.
And he said: "It's called a
quaalude. I bet you don't have
your headache now."
And he laughed, as
if it were a joke.
GWEN IFILL: Cosby has denied
allegations of rape and assault.
We contacted his spokesman
again today, who declined to
comment on the latest report.
Noreen Malone is a senior editor
at "New York" magazine who
interviewed and wrote many of
the stories of the 35 women.
Thank you for joining
us, Noreen Malone.
How long has this project
been in the works?
NOREEN MALONE, "New York": The
project has been under way since
December, actually, about
six months.
Our photo director at the
magazine had seen all the women
coming forward one by one. And
she had the vision to see that,
if you put them all together in
one picture, how powerful
that would be.
GWEN IFILL: Did you have trouble
having them to agree? Did anyone
say no?
NOREEN MALONE: People did say no
at first. One or two women
signed on, and then it
snowballed.
We actually had people four
sign on in just the last week.
I think, for many of these
women, they had already decided
to come forward. All of these
women had already come forward.
So they had already made the
tough decision to go public.
It was just a matter of sharing
even more with the public.
GWEN IFILL: Well, not only was
there -- were there photographs
taken, not only did some
of them agree to these videos,
but a lot of them met each other
for the first time. What
was that like? Did you get to
spend some time at the photo
shoot to see how they interacted
with one another?
NOREEN MALONE: I did. I went by
the photo shoot in New York.
And I think, for a lot of them,
it was weirdly a joyous
occasion. That seems like an odd
word to use, but, you know, none
of them had met each other in
person before, and they
were people who this was, you
know, a formative thing in their
lives, and these were the only
people who could share
this experience with them.
GWEN IFILL: Had these women been
blaming themselves all this
time? Is that the way that
works?
NOREEN MALONE: They really had.
Many of these incidents happened
in the '60s and '70s and even
the '80s, when date rape
wasn't the same thing. There was
literally no word for that at
that time. And so these
women had this experience that
they didn't even -- they
couldn't even make sense of
themselves,
much less tell people about
it and have people listen.
GWEN IFILL: In fact, if look at
the pictures, it's kind of
remarkable how many of them are
of a certain age, in their 50s
and 60s now. So they all went
through this some time ago,
allegedly.
Separate interviews,
similar stories, however.
NOREEN MALONE: Yes. That was
a really striking thing.
You know, we talked to all 35
women separately, and the same
themes kept coming up. You know,
many of the incidents that they
described, the alleged
incidents, are quite similar.
They involve Cosby contacting an
agent and saying, you know, can
you put me in touch
with someone? Many of these
girls were so excited. They were
models and actresses trying
to make it and they heard that
Bill Cosby had taken an
interest.
And then drugging a drink is a
real theme, unfortunately,
throughout these incidents.
GWEN IFILL: I want to talk to
you about the empty chair.
It's the thing that your eye is
drawn to after you look at these
women lined up and facing
the camera. What is the
significance of it and -- first,
what's the significance of it?
NOREEN MALONE: Well, I think
it's somewhat open to
interpretation.
But as we were talking to many
of these women, almost all of
them said, oh, I know of someone
else who -- she's not going to
come forward, she's not going to
talk, but it happened to
her, too.
And people on social media have
really seized on the empty chair
as a way of saying, OK,
these 35 women are ready to talk
about something that happened in
their past, but not everyone
who has been sexually assaulted
or raped is ready for that. And
so people were, you know,
offering up reasons why women or
men might not be ready to come
forward and talk about
it and hashtagging
it #TheEmptyChair.
GWEN IFILL: In fact, one of the
interesting things, I thought,
in scrolling through some
of the responses was, a lot of
it had nothing to do with Bill
Cosby at all.
NOREEN MALONE: Mm-hmm. It really
took on a life of its own, which
was great to see.
GWEN IFILL: Have you -- we have
not, but have you gotten any
reaction from the Cosby camp
on this latest report?
NOREEN MALONE: I have not. And
we reached out before
publication to several of his
lawyers,
and we have not
heard back at all.
GWEN IFILL: So, did you
anticipate any of this reaction?
Did you anticipate that there
might be legal pushback? How did
you, I guess, vet all of these
stories?
NOREEN MALONE: Well, it
was quite a process.
The magazine has a fact-checking
process, but, you know, we don't
-- all of the stories
are, we say, alleged in this. We
check them out to the best of
our ability, but, again,
at the end of the day, it's he
said/she said. Cosby has not
been convicted of any crimes.
The statute of limitation is up
for all of these incidents. So
our focus was really more
in letting these women
tell their stories.
GWEN IFILL: In this case, it was
he said, she said, she said, she
said, and so on.
NOREEN MALONE: Right.
GWEN IFILL: Noreen Malone of
"New York" magazine, thank you
very much.
NOREEN MALONE: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online: We continue our series
on long-term care with
three profiles of older
Americans who have decided to
age in place, that is, to stay
in their homes, rather then move
to nursing facilities. See how
they do it. We have their
stories on our home
page, PBS.org/NewsHour.
GWEN IFILL: And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
On Tuesday: how the first test
of the atomic bomb changed the
lives of those living downwind
from the blast.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow evening. For all
of us at the "PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.